http://rendezvous.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/11/26/as-doha-climate-talks-convene-report-cites-unfulfilled-commitments/

Bullit Marquez/Associated PressProtesters display placards during a rally near the U.S. Embassy in Manila on Nov. 14, calling on industrialized countries to act on climate change.
All eyes are on Doha, Qatar, this week as world leaders, politicians, academics and environmentalists gather to work on a global solution to climate change at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Reporting and analysis on how to move the world toward a sustainable model.
O.K., not all eyes.
After deep disappointment at the Rio+20 conference in June, when nations wrestled with the related challenges of sustainable development, more and more people may be ignoring these global confabs.
Still, it is in Doha that the slow-turning wheels of global politics will try to devise plans to both mitigate climate change and adapt to it. “This conference is not merely procedural, it can also bring about important policy,” said Martin Kaiser, head of the International Climate Politics unit of Greenpeace.
One important discussion during the two week conference — meetings start today and continue through Dec. 7 — will center on a new emissions cap-and-trade agreement, as the famously flawed Kyoto Protocol is scheduled to expire this year.
My colleague Andrew C. Revkin posted this funny, very short video primer to explain the very complicated matter of climate treaties (above and here).
But how much of the talk — even the seemingly “easy” commitments to honor, like cash support to poor countries — are actually fulfilled? Not many, says a report to be released today by a British think tank. Some of the world’s richest countries have failed to honor their financial pledges to some of the world’s poorest.
The European Union and nine countries pledged about $30 billion under the so-called fast-start funding program overseen by the U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change in Copenhagen three years ago.
“The biggest surprise is that the countries that gave the money did not track it in any significant way,” said Saleemul Huq, one of authors of the study, The Eight Unmet Promises of Fast-Start Climate Finance, in a telephone interview from Doha.
According to the report by the International Institute for Environment and Development — which also examined whether nations were giving enough, whether funds were loans or grants and whether they went toward mitigation or adaptation projects — transparency is lacking when it comes to funds committed to fighting global climate change. Mr. Huq blames the tendency of big donor nations to channel funds through third-party agencies, such as USAID in the case of the United States.
Of the $30 billion committed under fast-start, very little has actually reached the recipient countries. Even less has made its way into adaption projects that poor countries, which disproportionately feel the effects of climate change, need, according to Mr. Huq.
The funding, which was to cover a three year period ending this year, was supposed to support mitigation and adaptation projects in equal measure. The money was also supposed to be new. But I.I.E.D. found that many donor nations either recommitted previously pledged funds or paid disproportionately toward climate mitigation projects.
Long debated in countries most vulnerable to environmental change, the debate on climate change adaptation has become a hot topic in the United States, which recently has been struck by a series of extreme weather events.
The I.I.E.D report found that the United States, which pledged $5.1 billion at the Copenhagen meeting, was allocating about 17 percent of the total for adaptation measures in the world’s poorest countries. When it comes to donor transparency, the United States was rated 9th of the total 10 donors by the report. The European Union was rated 5th on the same scale. While Switzerland led the pack in terms of transparency, the think tank found that the country’s original pledge of $135.5 million represented only 75 percent of its fair share, a metric based on perceived responsibility and capacity to help (by the same metric, the United States was found to be contributing 43 percent of its fair share).
At Doha, countries are expected to commit to another round of fast-start funding. The next commitment — $100 billion — is pledged starting in 2020, leaving an eight year gap for which funding has yet to be committed.
The conference comes at a critical time. With the European Union, which has long shown leadership on the issue of climate change, currently focused on in its own fiscal difficulties, activists worry that the Doha summit will not lead to the necessary solutions.
“Without a strong E.U. at the table, it will be impossible to convince the U.S. to become active,” said Mr. Kaiser of Greenpeace.
Of course, the E.U. was at the table at Rio +20.
What do you think? Do you believe the U.N. framework meetings at Doha will present an opportunity to steer the world toward a climate change solution?