http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/25/world/europe/greenpeace-activists-climb-russian-oil-rig-in-arctic-ocean.html?_r=0

MOSCOW — A team of Greenpeace activists scaled the side of a Russian oil-drilling platform far out in the Arctic Ocean on Friday and suspended themselves on ropes while unfurling a banner that said “Save the Arctic,” as workers above sprayed cold water on them.
In one of the more brazen recent protests by Greenpeace, the environmental group focused on marine conservation, the activists set out from their ship, the Arctic Sunrise, and skipped over the waves in inflatable motorboats. Greenpeace’s global executive director, Kumi Naidoo, was among those who went aboard. A spokeswoman for the activists said they had intended to spend several days suspended from the platform, but left after 15 hours because of the spraying.  
The activists sailed over an expanse of choppy sea and then used a slingshot to loop string, and then rope, over structures on the gigantic platform, a video posted on the group’s Web site showed.
Within minutes, they were hanging against the side, along with tarpaulin shelters, food and other provisions sufficient for several days. Russian workers on the platform talked to the activists, but also sprayed them, said Polina V. Molysheva, a spokeswoman for Greenpeace.
Greenpeace said in a statement that the activists hoped to disrupt drilling at the site, operated by a subsidiary of the state energy giant Gazprom, and one of several large projects the global petroleum industry is pursuing in the Arctic this summer.
Gazprom, in a statement, said the activists had not disrupted work on the platform and the crew had invited them to climb onboard. “It was suggested to them to come up onto the platform for a constructive dialogue,” the statement said.
The Gazprom platform is intended to tap a shallow-water deposit in the Pechora Sea, one of many ice-clogged inlets off the Arctic Ocean above Russia recently opened to drilling.
Exxon Mobil is exploring for oil this summer in joint venture with Russian partners relatively close by, in the Kara Sea between the Novaya Zemlya archipelago and the Yamal Peninsula.
Farther to the east, the Shell oil company has plans to begin drilling in the Chukchi Sea, off the northern coast of Alaska. Large areas of the Arctic Ocean that were once icebound are now more often free of ice in the summertime because temperatures are warming in the north. This eases access for offshore drilling. September is the month when the Arctic Ocean is most free of ice.
By midafternoon Friday, two helicopters had arrived at the platform, Greenpeace reported. After they arrived, the crew tried but failed to hoist the activists onto the platform deck, using equipment on the rig. The Russians then resumed spraying the group. A Web post from one activist said the crew also dropped metal items, which he did not identify, from the deck above, endangering the protesters.
The protest was also intended to draw attention to what Greenpeace says is the inability of oil companies to provide a plausible plan for cleaning an oil spill in the ice-covered Arctic, considered a far greater technical challenge than BP faced in the Gulf of Mexico two years ago.
There was no indication as of late Friday afternoon that the Russian government planned to detain them, but if the activists who clambered aboard the platform were arrested, they would be subject to Russian laws, which punish activism severely.