http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/07/world/asia/malaysian-activist-irene-fernandez-speaks-out-for-migrant-workers.html

KUALA LUMPUR — Irene Fernandez has no shortage of shocking tales of the abuse and exploitation of foreign domestic workers in Malaysian homes.
One Cambodian woman, who said she was forced to cook, clean and care for children from 5 a.m. until past midnight, told Ms. Fernandez that her employer once tied her hands behind her back and ordered her to leap down a flight of stairs, leaving her with a permanent limp.
Another domestic helper, also from Cambodia, reported that she used to suck the fish bones left on her employer’s dinner plate, because she was only given leftovers to eat.
“It’s so dehumanizing,” Ms. Fernandez said. “To me, it’s just slavery days coming back — and that’s just frightening.”
Such cases have come to dominate the life of Ms. Fernandez, whose grandmotherly appearance masks seemingly bottomless reserves of energy to speak up for the millions of foreign workers who toil in Malaysian homes, palm oil plantations, construction sites and other jobs often shunned by Malaysians.
A leading figure in civil society and a longtime member of the political opposition, Ms. Fernandez’s habit of not mincing her words has often landed her in trouble with the authorities.
She gained international attention as the face of one of the country’s longest-running criminal trials after she was charged in 1996 with publishing falsehoods in a report on the abuse of migrants in government detention centers. More recently, she has come under investigation over possible sedition after she declared that Malaysia was not safe for foreign workers.
Now 66 and with osteoarthritis often forcing her to use a wheelchair, Ms. Fernandez appears to have lost little of the vigor that has driven her to seek justice for migrant workers, insisting that she will continue providing a voice for the vulnerable as long as she is able.
The executive director of Tenaganita , a nongovernmental group she established more than two decades ago to help foreign workers, Ms. Fernandez’s connection to migrants can be traced back to her familial roots. Her parents were Indians who came to Malaysia to work on a rubber plantation when the country was under British rule.
Ms. Fernandez learned early on that not everyone was treated equally, recalling how, as the daughter of a supervisor, she was not supposed to play with the laborers’ children.
“I always found that a big conflict in me,” she said.
Ms. Fernandez’s first job was as a teacher, but at the age of 23, she left the security of a government job for the uncertain life of an activist. Stints at various labor and rights groups followed, including the Young Christian Workers Movement and later the women’s rights movement.
“After two to three years I felt that the whole advocacy was taken over by middle-class women and there was a gap for me where women workers were concerned, and that’s how, in 1991, I formed Tenaganita,” she said in an interview at the organization’s office in a Kuala Lumpur suburb.
Tenaganita — “women’s force” in Malay — runs shelters for migrants and victims of human trafficking who have been abused or exploited and helps them seek legal recourse. It initially focused on women but has expanded to include male migrants.
Rights groups estimate that Malaysia is home to about four million foreign workers, about half of whom are undocumented, making them particularly vulnerable to abuse. Most are from Indonesia, the Philippines, Nepal, India and Bangladesh.
The accounts of abuse she has heard led Ms. Fernandez to conclude that Malaysia does not do enough to protect migrant workers, she told The Jakarta Post, an Indonesian newspaper, in May.
Her allegations were not new. It was only last year that Indonesia lifted a ban on women going to Malaysia as domestic workers that had been imposed in 2009 after a string of abuse cases. But Ms. Fernandez’s comments prompted a police investigation into whether she had contravened the country’s Sedition Act.
Maznah Mazlan, the deputy human resources minister, criticized Ms. Fernandez’s remarks as unethical, inaccurate and unpatriotic.