http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9B02E7DF123FF936A25751C0A9649D8B63

CORRECTION APPENDED
 The barbarians are inside Canada's gates.
 A push by the activist investor William A. Ackman to shake up the railroad company Canadian Pacific has rattled the insular financial world in Canada, where shareholder battles are relatively rare.
 And while Mr. Ackman and Canadian Pacific initially tried to come to an agreement, it didn't take long before Mr. Ackman was threatening ''nuclear winter'' if changes weren't made at the company. Americans would not be surprised. Mr. Ackman's campaign heralds the arrival of bare-knuckled, United States-style activist investing in our neighbor to the north.
 His opening move came in October, when his hedge fund, Pershing Square Capital Management, disclosed that it had acquired a 12.2 percent stake in Canadian Pacific. Pershing Square has since increased its stake to 14.2 percent.
 Canadian Pacific, which unlike many large Canadian corporations is not controlled by a family or just a few shareholders, reacted quickly and met with Mr. Ackman four days later. At the meeting, Mr. Ackman and his colleagues at Pershing Square argued that a new chief executive was needed to replace Frederic J. Green.
 Mr. Ackman asserted that Mr. Green was too ingrained in the Canadian Pacific culture to institute the changes that the company needed. Shares of Canadian Pacific have lagged those of its peers over the last five years, and the company has the highest comparative operating expenses of the seven largest railroads in North America.
 Mr. Ackman suggested that the new chief executive be E. Hunter Harrison, who had run Canada's largest freight railroad, the Canadian National Railway. Mr. Harrison is retired and raising horses, but appears ready for battle again after having recently taken an interim chief executive position at Dynegy.
 In December, Canadian Pacific offered Mr. Ackman a board seat on condition that Pershing Square agree to a standstill. Pershing Square would be barred from trying to replace any members of the board for a period. At the same time, the company moved to strengthen its board by adding two new members, Tony L. Ingram, a former chief operating officer at CSX, and Edmond L. Harris, a former chief operating officer at Canadian Pacific.
 Mr. Harrison, however, was not wanted by Canadian Pacific. The company argued that the executive had a noncompete agreement with his old railroad company, creating legal barriers to his hiring.
 Moreover, Canadian Pacific argued that Mr. Ackman's plan to reduce operating expenses lacked ''concrete'' detail on putting it into effect. Many of the company's expenses are a result of higher pension costs that cannot be eliminated.
 On Jan. 4, Mr. Ackman wrote to Canadian Pacific's 70-year-old chairman to say that peace could be had if Mr. Harrison were made chief executive and two of Mr. Ackman's representatives were appointed to the board, but there would be ''nuclear winter'' if his demands were rebuffed. Clearly, Mr. Ackman was not buying into the polite Canadian investing culture.
 In hindsight, Canadian Pacific's failure to negotiate more meaningfully with Mr. Ackman was probably a mistake. It not only goes against the current trend of companies' engaging with activists, but with an investment of more than $1 billion, Pershing Square was not going to retreat quietly.
 Sure enough, less than three weeks later, Pershing Square announced that it would nominate five directors to the 15-member Canadian Pacific board, including Mr. Ackman, at the company's annual shareholder meeting on May 17.
 Mr. Ackman appears to have traction - shares of Canadian Pacific have risen 20 percent since Pershing Square's initial investment was disclosed - because many investors think that the railroad company is in need of a shake-up. For many investors, Mr. Ackman is the answer, whether or not Mr. Harrison runs the company.
 And Mr. Ackman may very well win. According to the research firm Capital IQ, the five biggest institutional investors in Canadian Pacific own 20 percent of the shares and three of them are American. At a Feb. 6 town hall meeting in Toronto, some 1,000 people attended or listened online to Mr. Ackman's presentation.
 Canada's legal rules also make Mr. Ackman's shareholder activism easier. (The government does have ownership restrictions in certain industries like banking and media and in 2010 blocked BHP Billiton's $39 billion effort to take over the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.) Canadian companies cannot adopt poison pills to limit activists from accumulating large stakes. Moreover, any shareholder owning more than 5 percent of a company can call a shareholder meeting at any time to replace the board.
 This is the main reason Mr. Ackman is resisting Canadian Pacific's request for a standstill. Canadian law gives him a sword to threaten the remaining directors. At any point, he can initiate a new election contest to replace them if they don't cooperate.
 Still, there are several months to go in this contest, and Mr. Ackman was similarly ahead in his battle for Target before eventually losing. But if shareholders continue to support Mr. Ackman, expect the Canadian Pacific board to cave in an effort to avoid an embarrassing loss..
 Win or lose, it remains to be seen whether Mr. Ackman's campaign will spur more shareholder activism in Canada. But his campaign does show that shareholder activism is changing in the United States.
 In contrast to a financial restructuring - like the complicated real estate transactions that Mr. Ackman had pitched for Target - the investor is now pushing for fundamental changes at Canadian Pacific. Since the financial crisis, shareholders have been wary of activism premised on complicated financial transactions. Shareholder activism now entails the harder work of overhauling businesses, something that will leave the playing field to the better-capitalized hedge funds. These are the funds that can afford to hire the expertise needed to run these businesses.
 Mr. Ackman and the remaining activist hedge funds left standing after the financial crisis are not only changing how they invest, but are investing in companies that were previously too big to be targets. Last year, Pershing Square successfully invested in Fortune Brands and J. C. Penney. That Canadian Pacific is a foreign company may be an indication that American activist investors will need to go abroad to find similar opportunities with larger companies.
 Mr. Ackman said last week that he was leading the way for shareholder democracy at large companies. The Globe and Mail newspaper quoted him as saying that he was part of a ''democratic process'' that was shifting ''the balance of power back to owners'' or shareholders.
 It may just be the case that American hedge funds will fulfill their promise of successful shareholder empowerment by exporting it.
 This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
 DRAWING (DRAWING BY HARRY CAMPBELL)