http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/18/business/energy-environment/cloud-services-rely-on-coal-or-nuclear-power-greenpeace-says.html

The infrastructure that supports the Internet, online commerce and nearly all corporate data services is engaged in a vast migration eastward in search of energy prices cheaper than anything available in Silicon Valley, where the digital revolution began, according to a report released Tuesday by the environmental group Greenpeace.
Internet companies often cloak themselves in an image of environmental awareness. But some companies that essentially live on the Internet are moving facilities to North Carolina, Virginia, northeastern Illinois and other regions whose main sources of energy are coal and nuclear power, the report said. The report singles out Apple as one of the leaders of the charge to coal-fired energy.
In the language of the Greenpeace report, those sources constitute “dirty energy,” meaning nonrenewable.
Apple immediately disputed the report’s findings, saying that the company planned to build two huge renewable energy projects at its recently opened data center in North Carolina that would eventually offset much of the coal-fired and nuclear energy use.
But in a contrast that is sure to generate debate in the hypercompetitive marketplace of the Internet, the report asserts that a few other companies, including Google and Facebook, have demonstrated much more commitment to shifting some of their electricity demands to renewable sources like wind, solar energy and hydroelectric power.
Everything that companies once did using paper, from personnel records to business reports, is now processed and stored electronically in energy-hungry installations called data centers. Data centers also house the computers that manage the Internet and the information that flows on it.
Companies whose images are tied to the Internet are likely to be the most responsive to the findings, said Gary Cook, an information technology analyst at Greenpeace who was the lead author of the report.
“They are very brand-conscious companies,” Mr. Cook said. “They want to be presenting themselves as responsible and innovative.” He added that the companies “don’t want people to be concerned about, when they post their videos, that that’s somehow attached to coal.”
In fact, coal accounts for about half the generation capacity of the electric utility that powers an enormous data center in Maiden, N.C., that Apple recently opened, and some industry analysts think the center will be expanded. Nuclear power accounts for the large majority of the rest of that capacity, according to figures supplied by the utility, Duke Energy.
The North Carolina data center powers Apple’s iCloud — one of several cloud computing services offered by companies that allow consumers to store large amounts of data, including photos and videos, and perform other digital tasks. The Greenpeace report is titled “How Clean Is Your Cloud?”
In a statement issued in response to the report, Apple disclosed for the first time that the data center would consume about 20 million watts at full capacity — much lower than Greenpeace’s estimate, which is 100 million watts. In territory served by Duke, a million watts is enough to power 750 to 1,000 homes.
Kristin Huguet, a spokeswoman for Apple, added that the company is building two large projects intended to offset energy use from the grid in North Carolina: an array of solar panels and a set of fuel cells.
Fuel cells are a technology that can produce relatively clean energy using fuels ranging from natural gas to so-called biogas — for example, emissions from landfills. Ms. Huguet said that the fuel cells would be powered by biogas and that together, the solar panels and fuel cells would supply a substantial percentage of the electricity needed by the data center.
Tom Williams, a spokesman for Duke Energy, defended the utility’s environmental record and said the report failed to acknowledge recent improvements and showed little understanding of the regulations governing utilities.
Mr. Williams said that the utility was required by state regulators to ensure that its energy was affordable, reliable and as environmentally clean as possible. He said that the report not only focused exclusively on environmental factors, but also neglected to point out that the utility was retiring some coal plants and installing scrubbers — which reduce smokestack emissions — on others.
“Our emissions have come down substantially over the last decade,” Mr. Williams said.
The report praised Google for its investments in solar and wind energy and its general advocacy of renewable energy. “These actions, among a slew of other investments, are playing a useful role in the total expansion of renewable energy,” the report said.
Google disclosed in September that in absolute terms, the company’s data centers consume enormous amounts of power: almost 260 million watts, or about a quarter of the output of a nuclear power plant.
Urs Hoelzle, senior vice president for technical infrastructure at Google, said in a statement that the company welcomed the Greenpeace report and believed that it would intensify the industry’s focus on renewable energy.