http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/13/business/global/bp-shareholders-approve-pay-for-new-chief.html

LONDON — The oil giant BP fended off a revolt by a minority of its shareholders Thursday over the award of a salary, bonus and stock package worth around $6.8 million to its chief executive, Robert W. Dudley.
The company’s remuneration report was approved at a meeting in London, effectively endorsing a substantial bonus for Mr. Dudley, who took over at BP in 2010 from Tony Hayward following the disastrous oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.
According to figures released by the company, 11.8 percent of shareholders voted against the package, indicating that, while there was some concern over pay policy, the clear majority of shareholders were willing to give the company the benefit of the doubt.
The vote came as BP continued to fight a legal battle in the United States over the oil spill, and coincided with a political debate in Britain about the level of pay of senior business leaders and bankers.
At the meeting Thursday, which lasted more than three hours, speakers voiced concerns about a series of environmental issues, but there were only a handful of critical comments on Mr. Dudley’s pay package.
Before the meeting, a note from Pensions & Investment Research Consultants, an advisory group, recommended that shareholders vote against the remuneration report.
The company’s pay structure, it said, “has the potential to pay excessive variable remuneration, and we note that during the year under review, this was the case.”
The report highlighted the fact that Mr. Dudley’s annual bonus was worth 150 percent of his base salary of $1.7 million.
“This is difficult to justify when the targets used to test performance are not disclosed, and considering that F.Y. 2011 was not a particularly easy year for the company,” it said, referring to its fiscal year.
BP said in a statement that the remuneration of directors was “closely aligned with both the long-term performance of the company and the interests of shareholders.”
“It is directly linked to the company’s strategy, is strongly performance-related and is weighted heavily toward the long term,” the company added.
Mr. Dudley’s overall pay is made up of $2.6 million in cash, plus $4.2 million in shares that must be held for three years.
At the meeting, campaigners on behalf of U.S. communities in the Gulf Coast region were also on hand. They argued that BP’s actions left much to be desired and said they were prevented from attended a similar BP meeting in 2011.
“I believe that trust comes from doing what you say you are going to do. That is how we have sought to act in the Gulf of Mexico,” Mr. Dudley said.
“Our guiding principle was not to do the minimum required by law but to do the right thing,” he added.