http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2011/jun/15/activists-bp-portrait-award?INTCMP=SRCH

Climate activists on Tuesday night targeted the BP Portrait Award ceremony in protest against sponsorship from the oil giant.
Demonstrators claimed BP was using the arts in an attempt to divert attention away from its impact on the environment.
But the National Portrait Gallery said the support of the global company was beneficial to artists.
The protesters displayed a collection of portraits outside the gallery that showed the impact of last year's Gulf of Mexico oil spill.
One of the pictures, entitled First Splash Since Spill, pictured a child playing in oil-covered water in Louisiana after being told it was safe.
The artist, Beverly Curole, said: "I captured Max, my grandson, on the first day the beach was opened and supposedly safe.
"Max was so excited he jumped in the water and made a huge splash. I then noticed flecks of oil at the tide line and knew something was wrong.
Some 14 portraits from the US Gulf Coast were submitted for tonight's award by campaign group Facing the Gulf.
Despite none of them being selected by the judges, the organiser Nancy Boulicault hoped they would force the gallery to look again at its link with BP.
She said: "We think the National Portrait Gallery needs to start asking themselves some questions about this relationship, in the same way as the people of the Gulf have had to ask themselves very serious questions."
She went on to say that the artists had some sympathy with the gallery.
"They understand the complications that come when oil becomes part of your life, because it's part of their lives.
"But what became quite important to everyone is the fact that we need another vision without oil in our lives.
"Our cultural institutions are about trying to create another vision, but when they are in bed with oil it's very hard for us to find that vision through our arts."
Facing the Gulf and direct action group London Rising Tide invited Sandy Nairne, the gallery's director, to view the alternative exhibition ahead of tonight's ceremony but said he declined.
A spokesman for the gallery said: "The National Portrait Gallery, while principally supported by grant-in-aid from government, is pleased to work with a wide range of companies in support of its exhibitions and displays.
"The sponsorship of the annual Portrait Award by BP is now in its 22nd year and their support directly encourages the work of artists and helps gain wider recognition for them."