http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/06/business/energy-environment/06iht-forest06.html

JAKARTA — Asia Pulp and Paper, one of the largest pulp and paper producers in the world, said on Tuesday that it had stopped clearing natural forests across its supply chains in Indonesia, accelerating an earlier commitment to do so by 2015.
The announcement comes as companies that rely on forests face increasing pressure from buyers to improve their environmental standards while financing aggressive demand-driven expansions. It also is just months before a two-year moratorium on new forest concessions mandated by the Indonesian government ends in May.
Environmental advisers say the about-face by a company with a history of poor corporate and environmental management could have wider implications for Indonesia’s main exporting industries, palm oil and mining.
“If A.P.P. can do this, there is no reason why any company anywhere in the world can’t do this,” said Scott Poynton, the executive director of the Forest Trust, a nonprofit forest management organization that is working with Asia Pulp and Paper, also known as A.P.P., to see that it implements its commitments. “Hopefully the government of Indonesia will look to bring in regulations to force companies in Indonesia to follow A.P.P.’s lead.”
A.P.P. is the largest pulp and paper company in Indonesia and a subsidiary of the Sinar Mas Group, which owns stakes in property and palm oil. It is also the third-largest pulp and paper company in the world, behind International Paper in the United States and Stora Enso of Finland.
In 2010, after aggressive campaigns by Greenpeace, Sinar Mas’s palm oil arm, Golden Agri-Resources, agreed to stop clearing rainforests and developing peatlands, which have naturally accumulated layers of peat that when disturbed can release harmful carbon emissions.
Forest campaigners said A.P.P.’s new policy, started at the beginning of the month and under which it will use pulp only from trees grown on plantations, was a step toward reversing past actions. They also said the breakthrough for efforts to conserve Indonesia’s remaining natural forests was a sign that public pressure was having an effect.
“They’re starting to realize that if they want to be a key player in the international market, there is no point for them to continue with deforestation and peatland destruction,” said Bustar Maitar, the head of Greenpeace’s forest campaign in Indonesia.
Environmental activists welcomed the decision but said the company had failed to live up to similar promises in the past, citing at least three unmet commitments to stop the clearing of forests in the past decade. Many are also concerned with how A.P.P. has handled dozens of land disputes within its concessions.
“These are things they need to get a grip on if they want to be a truly sustainable player,” said Aditya Bayunanda, a pulp and paper manager at WWF-Indonesia, a conservation group.
The company’s fortunes depend on whether it can convince buyers and investors that it has changed its practices.
In 2001 A.P.P. defaulted on $13.9 billion in debt, drawing attention to deficiencies in its corporate governance. As part of debt restructuring agreements, the company agreed to ensure that its production facilities “meet certain standards,” the company said.
Company executives say A.P.P. has been trying to burnish its environmental credentials against an onslaught of criticism from environmental activists. They hope its new commitments will help with expansion plans and push others in the right direction.
“We aspire to be a global leader in the pulp and paper industry, and to be a real leader we need to set a new benchmark for other players to follow,” Aida Greenbury, the managing director of sustainability at A.P.P., said earlier this week.
For years, groups like Greenpeace and the Rainforest Action Network have focused on A.P.P. with campaigns that accuse the company of fueling climate change and pushing rare Sumatran tigers, orangutans and elephants toward extinction by clearing the forests where they live.